in this video we'll talk about the
normal equation which for some linear
regression problems will give us a much
better way to solve for the optimal
value of the parameters theta concretely
so far the algorithm that we've been
using for linear regression is gradient
descent where in order to minimize the
cost function J of theta we would take
this iterative algorithm that takes many
steps so that multiple iterations of
gradient descent to converge to the
global minimum
in contrast the normal equation will
give us a method to solve for theta
analytically so there rather than
needing to run this iterative algorithm
we can instead just solve for the
optimal value for theta all in one go so
that in basically one step you get to
the optimal value right there it turns
out the normal equation method has some
advantages and some disadvantages but
before we get to that and talk about
when you should use it let's get some
intuition about what this method does
for this explanatory example let's
imagine let's take a very simplified
cost function J of theta that's just a
function of a real number theta so for
now imagine that theta is just a scalar
value or that theta is just a real value
is just a number rather than a vector
imagine that we have a cost function J
there's a quadratic function of this
real valued parameter theta so J of
theta looks like that well how do you
minimize a quadratic function for those
of you that know a little bit of
calculus you may know that the way to
minimize a function is to take
derivatives and to set diverters equal
to 0 so if you take the derivative of J
with respect to the parameter theta you
get some formula which I'm not going to
derive and then you set that derivative
equal to 0 and this allows you to solve
for the value of theta that minimizes J
of theta that was the simpler case of
when theta is just a real number in the
problem that we're interested in theta
is no longer just a real number but
instead is this n plus 1 dimensional
ramit er vector and a cost function J is
a function of this vector value of theta
0 through theta M and the cost function
looks like this sum square cost function
on the right how do we minimize this
cost function J calculus actually tells
us that if you that one way to do so is
to take the partial derivative of J with
respect to every parameter theta J in
turn and then to set all of these 0 if
you do that and you solve for the values
of theta 0 theta 1 up to theta n then
this will give you the values of theta
that minimize the cost function J well
if you actually work through the
calculus and work through the solution
to the parameters theta 0 through theta
n the derivation ends up being someone
involved and what I'm going to do in
this video is actually do not go through
the derivation which is kind of long and
kind of involved but what I want to do
is just tell you what you need to know
in order to implement this process so
that you can solve for the values of the
Thetas that corresponds to where the
partial derivative is equal to 0 or
alternatively or equivalently the values
of Thetas that minimize the cost
function J of theta and I realize some
of the comments I made may have made
more sense only to those of you that
know more familiar calculus so but if
you don't know if you're less familiar
of calculus don't worry about it I'm
just going to tell you what you need to
know in order to implement this
algorithm and get it to work for the
example that I want to use as a running
example let's say that I have M equals 4
training examples in order to implement
this normal equation method what I'm
going to do is the following
I'm going to take my data set so here
here are my four training examples in
this case let's assume that you know
these four examples is all the data I
have ok what I'm going to do is take my
data set and add an extra column that
corresponds to my extra feature x0 that
still always takes on this value of 1
what I'm going to do is I'm then going
to construct a matrix called capital X
that's a major
exactly contains all of the features for
my training data so completely here is
my here all my features I'm going to
take all those numbers and put them into
this matrix X ok so just you know copy
the data over one column at a time and
then I'm going to do something similar
for for Y so I'm going to take the
values I'm trying to predict and
construct now a vector like so and call
that a vector Y so X is going to be a M
by n plus 1 dimensional matrix and Y is
going to be a M dimensional vector where
m is the number of training examples and
n is n is the number of features I have
n plus 1 because of this extra feature
x0 that I had finally if you take your
matrix action you take your vector Y and
if you just compute this and set theta
to be equal to X transpose X inverse
times X transpose Y this will give you
the value of theta that minimizes your
cost function there was a lot that
happened on the slide and I work through
it using one specific example of one
data set let me just write this out in a
slightly more general form and then let
me just and later on in this video let
me explain this equation a little bit
more in case um is not yet entirely
clear how to do this in the general case
let's say we have M training examples so
it's 1 y 1 up to XM ym and n features so
each of my training examples X I may
look like vector like this there's an N
plus 1 dimensional feature vector the
way I'm going to construct the matrix X
this is also called the design matrix is
as follows each training example gives
me a feature vector like this that say
this sort of n plus 1 dimensional vector
the way we're going to construct my
design matrix X is only construct a
matrix like this and what I'm going to
do is take the first training example so
that's a vector take us transpose so it
ends up being this you know long flat
thing and make X 1 transpose the first
row of my design matrix X then I'm going
to take my second training example x2
take the transpose of that and put that
as a second row of X and so on down
until my last training example take the
transpose of that and that's my last row
of my matrix X and so this makes my
matrix X and M by n plus 1 dimensional
matrix as a concrete example let's say I
have only one feature really only one
feature other than X 0 which is always
equal to 1 so if my features feature
vectors X I are equal to this 1 which is
x0 and then you know some real feature
like maybe the size of the house then my
design matrix X would be equal to this
for the first row I'm going to you know
basically take this and take this
transpose so I'm going to end up with 1
and then I'm x11 for the second row go
negative 1 and then X 1 2 and so on down
to 1 and then X 1m and thus this will be
a M by 2 dimensional matrix so that's
how I construct the matrix X and the
vector Y maybe and sometimes I might
read and everyone talk did you know that
as a vector there very often I'll just
write this as Y either way the vector Y
is obtained by taking all the labels all
the correct prices of houses in my
training set and just stacking them up
into an M dimensional vector and that's
why finally having constructed the
matrix X and the vector Y we then just
compute theta as X transpose X inverse
times
Transpo's lie
I just wanna make sure that this
equation makes sense to you and that you
know how to implement it so you know
what we'll let concretely what is this X
transpose X inverse well X transpose X
inverse is the inverse of the matrix X
transpose X concretely if you set if you
were to say set a to be equal to X
transpose times X so X transpose is a
matrix X transpose times X gives you
another matrix and we call that matrix a
then you know X transpose X inverse is
just you take this matrix a and you
invert it right let's equal to let's say
a inverse and so that's how you compute
this thing you compute X transpose X and
then you compute this inverse we haven't
yet talked about octave we'll do so in a
later set of videos but in the octave
programming language or similarly and
also the MATLAB programming language is
very similar the command to compute this
quantity I guess really a disk quantity
X transpose X inverse times X times y is
as follows in octave X prime is the
notation that you use to denote X
transpose and so this expression that's
boxing and read that's computing X
transpose times X P in is a function for
computing the inverse of a matrix so
this computes X transpose X inverse and
then you multiply that by X transpose
and you multiply that by Y so you end up
computing that formula which I didn't
prove but it is possible to show
mathematically even though I'm not gonna
do so here it that this formula gives
you the optimal value of theta in the
sense that this if you set theta equal
to this that's the value of theta that
minimizes the cost function J of theta
for linear regression one last detail in
an earlier video I talked about feature
scaling and the idea of getting features
to be on similar ranges of scales of
similar ranges of values of each other
if you're using this normal equation
method then feature scaling isn't
actually necessary and is actually okay
if say some feature x1 is between 0 and
1 and some feature exteriors between
your ranges from 0 to 1000 and some
feature x three ranges from 0 to 10 to
minus 5 and if you're using the normal
equation method this is okay and there's
no need to do feature scaling although
of course if you were using gradient
descent then feature scaling is still
important
finally when should you use gradient
descent and when should you use the
normal equation method
here are some of their advantages and
disadvantages let's say you have M
training examples and n features one
disadvantage of gradient descent is that
you need to choose the learning rate
alpha and often this means running up a
few times with different learning rate
alpha and then see what works best and
so that's a little extra work and extra
hassle another disadvantage of n descent
is that new it needs many iterations and
so depending on the details that could
make it slower although there's more to
the story as we'll see in a second as
for the normal equation you don't need
to choose any learning rate alpha so
that it makes it really convenient makes
it simpler to implement you just run it
and it just usually just works and you
don't need to iterate so you don't need
to plot J of theta or check the
conversion sort of take all those extra
steps so far the balance seems to favor
a normal equation the normal equation
here are some disadvantages of the
normal equation and some advantages of
grading descent gradient descent works
pretty well even when you have a very
large number of features so you know
even if you have millions of features
you can run gradient descent and they'll
be reasonably efficient and it will do
something reasonable
in contrast the normal equation in order
to solve for the parameters theta we
need to solve for this term we need to
compute this term x transpose x inverse
this matrix x transpose x that's an N by
n matrix if you have n features because
if you look at the dimensions of X
transpose dimension of X you multiply
and figure out what the dimensional
of the product is the matrix X transpose
X is an N by n matrix where n is the
number of features and phone on most
computer implementations the cost of
inverting a matrix grows roughly as the
cube of the dimension of the matrix so
computing this inverse costs roughly
order n cube times sometimes is slightly
faster than thank you but design you
know close enough to fall for our
purposes so if n is the number of
features is very large then computing
this quantity can be slow and the normal
equation that that can actually be much
slower so if n is large then I might
usually use gradient descent because we
don't want to pay this all the NQ time
but the Zen is relatively small then the
normal equation might give you a better
way to solve the parameters what a small
and large mean well if n is on the order
of a hundred then inverting one hundred
one hundred matrix is no problem by
modern computing standards if n is a
thousand I will still use a normal
equation method inverting a thousand by
thousand matrix is actually a really
fast in the modern computer if n is ten
thousand then I might start to wonder
inverting a 10,000 by 10,000 matrix thus
we get kind of slow and it might then
start to maybe lean in the direction of
gradient descent but maybe not quite N
equals 10,000 you can sort of inverted
10,000 by 10,000 matrix but it gets much
bigger than that then I would probably
use gradient descent so if N equals 10
to the 6 or even million features then
inverting a million by million matrix is
going to be very expensive and I would
definitely favor gradient descent of if
that many features so exactly how washio
set of features has to be before you
convert to greatness N and it was hard
to give a strict number but for me it's
usually around 10,000 but I might start
start to consider switching over to our
gradient descent or maybe some other
algorithms that I will talk about later
in the sauce to summarize so long as the
number of features is not to launch the
normal equation gives us a great
alternative method to solve for the
parameters theta
concretely so long as the number of
features is less than 1000 you know I
would use I would usually just
the normal equation method rather than
gradient descent to preview some ideas
that we'll talk about later in this
course as we get to the more complex
learning algorithm for example when we
talk about classification algorithms
like logistic regression algorithm we'll
see that those algorithms actually the
normal equation method actually do not
work for those more sophisticated
learning algorithms and we will have to
resort to gradient descent for those
algorithms so so gradient descent is a
very useful algorithm to know both for
linear regression when we have a large
number of features and for some of the
other algorithms that we'll see in this
course because for them the normal
equation method just doesn't apply it
doesn't work but for the specific model
of linear regression the normal equation
can give you a alternative then can be
much faster than gradient descent and so
depending on the details of your
algorithm it depend on the details of
your problem and how many features you
have both of these algorithms are well
worth knowing about